---
layout: single
title: Two Birds
author: Amalia Abbar
category: [issue2, poetry]

---

you make a soul.

you made love
<br>with the walls of 
<br>Mama's womb. 
<br>you shared a space
<br>I lived in alone
<br>for nine months 
<br>years later.
<br>you played, 
<br>you built
<br>and you bubbled
<br>her womb
<br>with strength and love
<br>for us,
<br>knowing there were going
<br>to be many
<br>to pay her with love
<br>and kick her
<br>when happy
<br>and dance to the
<br>rough music
<br>she favored 
<br>during pregnancy.

did you taste her hope? 
<br>when she shared her love
<br>with you through the
<br>umbilical cord? 
<br>did you float
<br>when her hope
<br>minced with your despair? 
<br>did you know, 
<br>Mama didn't know? 

she thought
<br>her baby was 
<br>heavier
<br>than all the other babies.

she didn't know
<br>there were two.

she flew with hope
<br>under her wings
<br>for her first baby.

but she had enough
<br>to take two
<br>under her wings.

you left her
<br>almost like those
<br>ungrateful inhabitants
<br>leaving abruptly,
<br>angry with the tenant
<br>before she could
<br>see you.

you both lay
<br>on Papa's 
<br>arms:
<br>one for you
<br>and
<br>one for you.

you slept
<br>throughout.

he named you
<br>and
<br>he named you.

he laid you

under the sands
<br>buried you
<br>prayed for you

a seed of love
<br>sprouted
<br>where you slept
<br>touched
<br>by his tears.

do you know, 
<br>you make him proud?

he always said, 

"they would be taller than me
<br>equally strong
<br>carrying me
<br>if I were to fall.
<br>I would have had one right here," 
<br>beneath his left, 
<br>"and one right here,"
<br>beneath his right;

"if they were to have seen the light
<br>of our world".

he is proud of us too.
<br>he loves his girls
<br>like he loves you both.

I love you too.

do you love me? 

Papa always said, 

"don't you worry. they are two of the birds in heaven and they have already saved a space for you,
<br>and for her."

I believe Papa.

and I know you love me 
<br>with a burn
<br>like the one 
<br>that 
<br>Papa's hot tea
<br>leaves
<br>on my tongue.

I love you dear brothers. 


> A/N: stillborn.... and stillbirth.

