---
title: Two Poems
author: CL Severson
category: [issue5, poetry]
---

### Essential Vocabulary for Transfolk


**Cisbitch fibrosis**: extremely common societal illness defined by mucilaginous male gender roles that prevent the oxygenation of feminine progress.<br>
**Entraptured**: when you blame a trans person for your attraction to them. <br>
**Gendergetics**: the non-linear flux in the expression of personal power. <br>
**Non-whinary**: when transfolk don’t have to process your gender journey for you. <br>
**Queernobyl**: internalized toxic misogyny in queer culture. <br>
**Trancestors**: we are each the legacy of one another <br>
**Transanity**: When you become mentally ill because they label you so. <br> 
**Transciousness**: transgender consciousness. <br>
**Transmission**: your life’s work, what you are here to broadcast. <br>
**Transgression**: states of gender non-conforming rage. <br>
**Transilience**: continuing to transition despite being harassed on the daily. <br>
**Transist**: resisting patriarchal culture simply by existing as a trans person. <br>
**Transjectory**: A personal customized timeline of how YOU want to transition or not <br>
**Transogynist**: Having an ingrained hatred for transfolk. <br>
**Transphobia**: the currency of ciswomen of all races who wish to sustain what little power their men afford them in society. <br>
**Transpho-be-a-hero**: The accolades you get for doing the bare minimum to keep transgirls from being murdered or evicted. <br>
**Transpirational**: When you are overwhelmed with love for your sisters. <br>
**Transvivor**: what you are for making it this far. <br>
**Transwering machine**: for when you are just absolutely not here right now. <br>
**Tranthem**: Corny queer songs to try to get people to stop being violent towards us. <br>
**Tranthropologist**: How you feel dusting off old traumas buried in one of your personalities. Mental illness doesn’t disqualify gender. <br>
**Traumammoth**: A large trauma fossil. May require professional help, that’s normal! <br>
**Traumical**: when you learn to laugh and cry. you need them both to heal. <br>


### Masculine Assets


Men are the proprietors of power and so <br>
claiming anger as masculine assets <br>
and violence with it, are not accustomed <br>
to feminine display of disdain or displeasure <br>
(or bloodlust, rage, vengeance, and wrath) <br>
An angry woman disqualifies herself from womanhood, <br>
just by being angry. <br>
Her intellect is nullified by her inconvenient instinct <br>
but a man’s anger is fuel for his logic, his passion. <br>
He is raised to expect a servile female, to anticipate <br>
compliant cunts with mastery over unfathomable patience.<br>

He creates <br>
the dual gendered world: male or not male <br>
the dual gendered world: human or not human <br>
the dual gendered world: respectable or exploitable<br>
