---
title: Two Poems
author: Smriti Verma
category: [issue4, poetry]
classes: wide

---

## Images from Childhood 
 
The memory quickly fades into origin: <br>
days of sunlit, ashen mornings, and the golden –  <br>

bouncing off the copperware, the field of green, <br>
chiseling away the edges, the teeth-like irregularities, <br>
 
and softening June with the colour of setting suns. <br>
Surrendering to the shape of birds at twilight, <br>
 
and us – little figurines, hands a mess of bones, <br>
Bodies tumbling towards another fate. <br>
 
This was back when we couldn’t separate  <br>
the glow from the sun, the fire from the spectacle – <br>
 
younger versions of the same self, <br>
stuck in a heaven of their own making. <br>
 
And the solitary image, stuck like a riddle in my head: <br>
you, running towards and running away, <br>
 
And your little hand – a fist around mine, <br>
 
 
Tight and tangible and dreamy,  <br>
 
like an aftermath of some great frenzy. <br> 
And the house, still surviving, breathing with wind, <br>

existing not as some painting or a photograph, <br>
but a structure, a monument, that lived on <br>

even when the sunsets, and the birds and us - <br>
all had stood up and left. <br>



<br><br>



## Notes on an Evening

In another world, I walk along a pier in a city that isn’t mine. The darkness<br>
reminds me of some kind of worship, and the water - liquid and fumbling. <br>
The first time I’d experienced winter was in an abandoned park, and the light<br>
closing itself into a coffin. How strange, this memory of stars. Little winks<br>
from a distance you can’t scale. And my eyes: only an instrument, empty, <br>
lacking, lagging. The ocean - far-off. The sky - a lifetime away. The raspy<br>
whispers, noise, pearls, and the town that set itself on fire. I’m so limited to my bone. <br>
The cold, embracing, like something that doesn’t love you back. We’d known<br>
this before, felt this before, waiting for words from a mouth that is turned towards<br>
another cup. The silence was never a virtue. My mouth, sewed with a fabric of glass. <br>

