---
title: Limbo
author: Upasa Borah
category: [issue4, poetry]

---

Limbo.<br>
Dying undying. <br>
Living unliving. <br>
Where do I belong? <br>
I peek through whitewashed windows and see golden lights, <br>
Stars maybe, if stars resided on<br>
Barren earth. <br>
Barren. <br>
They say blood adds nutrients to the soil. <br>
Our cheeks had blood once, you know; <br>
You can see it in the old photographs, <br>
Burned photographs, <br>
Burned edges of the photographs<br>
The only things that are now left in my chest. <br>

I do not know what to do, I say, <br>
To whom I do not know. <br>
Who hears, I do not know. <br>
The ones to ask? <br>
There are questions they want me to answer. <br>
Bullets shattering in my earbuds<br>
Tell me I do not belong. <br>

Limbo<br>
Juggling in between, <br>
Dying - undying. <br>
Living - unliving. <br>
Die then, I know their eyes say -<br>
Bomb shells, <br>
Bullet pallets. <br>
A displaced shoe, <br>
A deflated hot-air balloon. <br>
I used to dream in colour. <br>
Now it's just white. <br>
White like the whitewashed houses through the windows of which I see colours -<br>
Colours like red, like my daughter's favourite frock<br>
Or yellow, like my wife's favourite saree. <br>
I wonder where they are now - that frock and that saree. <br>
Maybe it's the ash beneath my feet. <br>
Ash. <br>
Grey. <br>
Detonations. <br>
Detentions. <br>
Deportation. <br>
Home. <br>
We used to sleep on a bed, believe it or not, <br>
Before gravity exploded beneath us, <br>
Flung the pillows off to Space<br>
While we clung on to fences buried two centimetres into the ground<br>
Because on the other side we saw faces not marred with black<br>
Strange faces<br> 
And stranger voices. <br>
Cacophony. <br>
Like bombs<br>
And bullets. <br>
Shattered glass<br>
And shattered dreams. <br>

Shattered lives, <br>
In limbo. <br>

