---
title: Windows
author: Aparajita Deb
category: [issue4, poetry]

---

Windows in my house are<br>
dealers of bugs, friends with spiders. <br>
Shut so tight, if they were women, <br>
they'd have identical lips<br>
all aligned in a single line. <br>
If you tried to open them<br>
they'd protest like stiff legs. <br>
Windows in my room have forgotten<br>
what it feels like to want to run away<br>
from small town claustrophobia, <br>
except in my mother's room<br>
where they're flung open like obliging legs. <br>
In my mother's room, windows breathe. <br>
My mother has long accepted<br>
her suffocation. She sees no point<br>
in letting her windows<br>
or her children have a part in it. <br>

I ran away from the scary claustrophobia<br>
of small town windows<br>
and mothers<br>
before my hinges grew too tight. <br>
I climbed my way to the third floor<br>
of a windowless room - airtight. <br>
In that space where no fancy survives, <br>
I told myself I'd focus. <br>
College-topping, career building, <br>
ambition, self hate<br>
and a singular sense of knowing<br>
that I don't ever<br>
want to go back home, require focus. <br>

Free falling does not require focus. <br>
Imagine yourself standing<br>
at the top of the 100th floor<br>
of a building. On edge. Falling. <br>
Leisurely crossing one window at a time. <br>
Window after window, <br>
life after life, more lives than<br>
you'd ever read in books<br>
or knew you could have. <br>
As you fall faster, windows blur<br>
until you can see the ground. <br>
And all the nights spent<br>
in tangled limbs and hair, <br>
chasing dust motes, dogs, dreams<br>
pass by you in that blur, <br>
and make no sense<br>
in the raging wind<br>
that leaves your bones<br>
and breaks your heart. <br>
You thought you'd replace<br>
windowlessness with a balcony? <br>
The crash is inevitable. <br>
The crash is welcome. <br>
The crash is the price you pay<br>
for jumping head first<br>
off the 100th floor of reality<br>
and for the stolen moments<br>
you free fell through<br>
the windows of love. <br>
The crash is falling out of love. <br>

I had thought I'd replace<br>
windowlessness with a balcony. <br>
I have French windows<br>
in my room now. <br>
At night, they rumble<br>
with passing traffic, <br>
the satisfaction of their existence, <br>
the discontent of my ambition. <br>
Huge windows<br>
that let in all the light<br>
I could ever ask for. <br>
With this amount of light, <br>
I could have the sun in my mouth. <br>
With this disproportionate<br>
amount of inspiration, <br>
I could write endlessly. <br>
I don't have answers<br>
to every time they ask<br>
why I do not write. <br>
I put curtains on my windows. <br>
They're green and yellow and beautiful<br>
and smell like the loveliest shroud. <br>

