---
title: Refuge
author: Sonakshi Srivastava
category: [issue4, poetry]
 
---
 
It’s a circumambulation - <br>
For you and I <br>
A perpetual hunt for each other, <br>
And one that knows no end. <br>

One such hunt reproduces itself - <br>
Pricking, numbing the memory lane of my brain. <br>
Your claws shredding away the threads of flesh off my skeleton <br>
The agony, however, failing to dull  <br>
My already dead soul. <br>
The pain being no sharper than one already lived through. <br>

The insane sight of, <br>
A plethora of my dead relatives hauled up on the alien dockyard <br>
Seemed to moisten my already dry eyes. <br>

They came in large numbers- <br>
Another pitiable Exodus <br>
To escape the jaws of Cruelty- <br>
Only to enter Death’s. <br>

The faces gape at the chasm of hollow existence- <br>
And amongst all such faces, <br>
I see yours <br>
The putrid stink of Cruelty <br>
Refusing to decay  <br>
Your sweet smell of musk. <br> 

Rummaging through the store box of memory, <br>
Some yellow and some tainted red, <br>
I stumble upon the undoctored vignettes - <br>
Of how you convincingly aced the game of hopscotch - <br>
Under the jasmine shaded bowers or the scorching sun. <br>
But Death now seems to have purloined your victory - <br>
Life rendered useless by someone else’s hate and indifference. <br>

Collared and chained, <br>
And victims since birth - <br>
We must have known that the only certainty  <br>
In our lives is Death, <br>
The ultimate refuge,  <br>
And reception for a modicum of dignity. <br>
And while you have embraced it earlier than me - <br>
I shall still be a regular prey. <br>
For I have to unmoor myself thrice now - <br>
From <br>

The hunt and the existence that weigh me down <br>
And our unborn dream’s craving for the<br> milk of human kindness. <br>
 

