---
title: Neighbourhood Bulletin
author: Prithvijeet Sinha
category: [issue4, poetry]
 
---
 
Once there was rain with the rainbow, <br>
friends with butterfly scents <br>
and snails touched by index fingers, <br>
back in the day when hands joined in the warmth of bonfires, <br> 
in winters that felt cold to the bone. <br>

Hence we were friends, <br>
temporary affections they were maybe. <br>
Yet these photo albums do not grow beards <br>
and have still to be turned around, <br>
for a new sheaf of recollection. <br>
Where have we put them away? <br>

The thrill of that rainwater harvesting, <br>
the cosmos of natural beings held by bare hands, <br>
free from the fears of picking fallen pears  <br>
and sitting on sand, <br>
that fell on our laps without restraint <br>
 and how we shared haikus of nights and days. <br>

** 

You called our names, <br>
cicadas whispered youth, <br>
parents sent us out to play <br>
and the trail of friendships picked up nicknames old and new. <br> 

Fingers held to count, <br>
to close eyes, <br>
hold sticks and share treats, <br>
to dance in circles and spin tops, <br>
yes those were the days indeed. <br>

** 

Then the neighbourhood grew up <br>
and left stuffed toys with silenced speech, <br>
left kids to pick up new affiliates <br>
and ally with faces far and deep. <br>
Ah! the parents too brought them indoors, <br>
those children of the hour. <br>
Knights of the clubhouse roundtable, <br>
they were truly the last of their lot. <br>

Binoculars and secrets of their kind, <br>
inherited by back room lots <br>

and those summer camp riddles  <br>
and hand painted drawings lost, <br>
to Evolution, <br>
to Time and the stain of the Future. <br>

Without butterflies and snails, <br>
the kite flying and the rain, <br>
old neighbours spin yarns of the era, <br>
painting bleached walls and the little toe-nails. <br>

